[THEME MUSIC]
>> "Thinking Allowed,"
conversations on the leading
edge of knowledge and discovery
with psychologist Jeffrey
Mishlove.
>> Hello, and welcome.
I'm Jeffrey Mishlove.
Today, we're going to
explore how to know God
without the need for belief.
My guest is physicist
Russell Targ,
who has written five
books, each of which
has the word "mind" in the
title, "Mind Reach," "The Mind
Race," "Mind at Large," and more
recently, "Miracles of Mind,"
and "The Heart of the Mind."
Welcome, Russell.
>> Hello.
I'm very happy to
be with you today.
>> It's a pleasure
to be with you again.
Your focus recently
has been that one
can have a direct
experience of God
without any need for belief.
In fact, you particularly
are interested in addressing
this point to people
such as yourself
in the high tech and
science professions, who
are not particularly
prone to religious belief.
>> I live in Silicon Valley,
which is filled with science,
technicians, and restaurants,
and Silicon Valley people would
rather suffer any kind of
pain than be caught believing
anything silly.
So in our book, which was the
outgrowth of a lot of research
in psychic abilities,
we discovered--
my personal experience
is that it's
possible to have a
direct experience of God
or an ability to reside in
love without having to believe
anything that would be offensive
to the discerning 21st century
mind.
>> Well, there's a concept
that has become very prominent
in physics in the last decade
or two that seems to be quite
relevant to your interest,
the notion of nonlocality.
>> Probably the most
interesting thing that I know
as a physicist is the idea that
we live in a nonlocal world.
In physics, this
pertains to the idea
that photons sent off
in opposite directions
travel away from each other
at the speed of light,
but are still interconnected,
so that if you
turn a polarizer that looks
at a photon on the left,
the photon on the right still
has to assume the position
and notices that its
twin has been collected,
even though these things are
traveling away from each other
at the speed of light.
Henry Stapp, a distinguished
physicist at UC Berkeley,
said recently that the
discovery of nonlocality
is perhaps the most important
fact learned in all of science
because it is different than
our ordinary, naive-realist
picture.
It shows that we are
connected to one another
in consciousness and in
nature, even to things
that appear to be far away.
>> Now, in all fairness, there
are many physicists who try
to integrate this notion of
nonlocality without having it
disrupt their complete
world picture.
Many materialists
accept the data
that you have just presented,
and there's still materialists.
>> Oh, certainly, that I'm not
requiring that anybody give up
their laboratory
materialist view.
What we discover is that
the idea of nonlocality
is coherent with what the
ancient Vedic scholars taught
2,500 years ago.
The earliest mystics who
sat peacefully on a rock
told us that if you
quiet your mind,
you notice that separation is
an illusion, that we are not
separated from one another.
This is consonant with
the Buddhist teachings,
the teachings of Patanjali,
teachings of Jesus,
who said that the peace
that passes understanding
is available to us--
does not require you
to believe anything.
It's something that
you can observe.
It's available to
the quiet mind.
>> Well, I seem to
recall, Russell,
in "Scientific American,"
maybe as far back as 1969
or so, Henri Costa de Beauregard
wrote an article when he first
reported on the kind of data
to which you're referring,
in which he said--
now often talked about in
terms of Bell's theorem
or the Einstein-Rosen-Podolsky
paradox.
And at that time, he said that
the fundamental distinction,
which we all hold in our
everyday reality to be basic,
the difference between
subject and object,
me and that which is not
me, that that distinction is
breaking down in physics.
It's an illusion.
>> Well, it's an
illusion in physics,
and it's also an illusion
with regard to our psychology
and our personal experience.
In physics, the
subject-to-object apparent
disharmony was broken down
by Niels Bohr and the idea
of complementarity because
what you expect to see
is what you get.
If you look at
photons with a prism,
if you look at
light with a prism,
you'll see that the prism
breaks the light down
into beautiful colors.
If you look at it with a
photodetector, electron
multiplier photo tube, you
collect one photon at a time,
and it'll go click,
click, click.
And Einstein calculated
how to determine the energy
of the photon from that.
So what you observe, the
nature of light you observe,
is a result of what you
bring to the experiment.
It's as though, in our
personal relationships,
for example, we give
all the meaning it
has to whatever we experience.
This is also
ancient Vedic ideas.
You know, what we see
has no intrinsic meaning,
depending on what we
bring to it with regard
to our personality, our
preconceptions, and our views,
and our scientific
instruments is a determinant
of what we get to see.
For example, I recently
took an airplane trip,
and the clerk behind the
counter had to tell me
that my plane was canceled.
Now, I could come to her
with the idea of namaste.
That is, the divine in me
meets the divine in you
because we are one
in consciousness.
We all are children
of God, you could say.
We're certainly connected in
a mind-to-mind connection.
So namaste says that there is a
transcendent aspect of me that
meets the transcendent
aspect of you,
and we can have a
namaste experience.
Or--
>> Regardless of the
flight being cancelled.
>> That's right.
Or I can be upset, and I can
have an interaction where
the jackass in me meets
the jackass in you,
and then we can have
a jackass experience.
And it's my choice.
I have the-- the observable
is the plane is canceled,
and I then get to choose
what kind of experience
I'll make out of that.
>> Well, you seem
to be suggesting,
back to our original theme of
the direct knowledge of God,
that an acknowledgment
of a connection,
an acknowledgment
of bliss, harmony,
that that somehow is more godly
than an experience of anger.
>> The experience of
anger lies on a continuum.
And, again, my theme is
that we get to choose.
Having worked in
aerospace for a decade
and Silicon Valley
for 30 years, I
observed that there is this
continuum from desperation,
resentment, fear, and anger
that we wake up with each day,
or we can wake up in gratitude
and forgiveness and love.
And we interestingly
get to choose.
We pop our eyes
open in the morning,
and you can say thank
you to the universe
or to God for the undeserved
good fortune you have
to live in Northern California,
or to be intelligent, or to be
healthy.
You didn't do anything
for those gifts.
A Christian would say
this is a result of grace.
The Spanish would say gracias.
But you wake up, and
you say thank you,
or you can fall into the
chaotic attractor pit
by the side of your bed.
When you step out, you fall into
your usual fearful pit one can,
pertaining to
mortgages, requirements
of jobs that are too little
time, too little money.
And you have a
choice where you're
going to reside that day.
The quiet mind, the
result of taking control
of our ongoing chatter, allows
you to reside in a loving space
and have occasional awakened
moments throughout the day
as you reside in love.
>> Now, the Hindu tradition,
as I understand it,
suggests that not
only is all one,
that there is no separation,
but that the essence of that
oneness is bliss.
It is joy, that that
experience of bliss and joy
is an experience of reality.
I think other traditions--
the Buddhists might say, no,
even that's a projection, that
ultimate reality is nothing.
It has no quality.
>> I think that what we observe,
certainly from my research
in extrasensory perception, is
that our consciousness is not
limited to the physical body.
That is, we have
expanded awareness,
and we are able to
describe and experience
many things that are located
far away from us and even
into the future.
And this expanded awareness
shows that there is more to us
than a physical
body, that there is
an aspect to us that transcends
our ordinary physical data.
Now, all of this I
can say as a physicist
because I'm not asking you
to believe any nonsense.
The data for our remote
viewing, our distant viewing
experiments, was published
in the most prestigious
scientific journals in the
world, "Nature," proceedings
of the engineering society,
American Academy of Sciences,
and so forth.
It has been replicated
in laboratories
all over the world.
So the fact that we
have expanded awareness
and are able to quiet our
mind to have these expanded
awareness experiences
is something
that's available to any person.
And what you discover is
that when you quiet your mind
to go into this experience, is
that you have the opportunity
to reside in the loving place
that the mystics talk about.
And this is the
loving place described
by Patanjali, Jesus, Blake,
Emerson, and all the mystics.
The mystics all agree that
the quiet mind has this loving
place as a place to reside.
>> Well, Russell, you've spent
your lifetime as a scientist
exploring extrasensory
perception, healing,
and other aspects
of the paranormal,
so you certainly know
what you're talking about.
We're about to take a break.
Well, we'll be back
after a few moments,
and when we come
back, let's focus
in a little more on what you've
discovered in your career
as a paranormal researcher.
[THEME MUSIC]
Welcome back to
"Thinking Allowed."
I'm your host, Jeffrey
Mishlove, and we're
talking with
physicist Russell Targ
about how to know God without
the necessity of belief.
Russell is a parapsychology
researcher and author
of five books,
including most recently
"The Heart of the Mind."
Russell, you actually
for over a decade
conducted research
in remote viewing
funded by the
military intelligence
establishment and the CIA.
>> That's right.
You could say that I was
a psychic spy for the CIA
and found God, as my path
was a gift from the Central
Intelligence Agency.
They arranged my life for me
so that I could sit quietly
in a dark room at Stanford
Research Institute,
teach people how to get in touch
with the part of themselves
that were psychic,
and lead people
into psychic experiences.
So I had a decade as a kind
of psychic travel agent,
where I would guide
people to be in touch
with their mental pictures
regarding what was going on
in the far reaches of Soviet
Union, or Siberia, or Iran,
or across town in Palo Alto.
We would help people
describe and experience
what was happening, where
a distant person was hiding
or at distant
geographical coordinates.
As a result of that,
I would be in harmony
or try and make my mind
coherent with the person who
I was guiding in the
remote viewing experience.
So it was really a decade
of mind-quieting experience
that I got to have, as I would
teach each of these people
how to do remote viewing.
And these were not
necessarily gifted people.
We supported our
program year after year
by showing government
scientists and administrators,
right up to the
undersecretary of Defense.
We would get the undersecretary,
who would come to us and say,
I've come to California.
Show me something psychic.
Who's a psychic?
And I would tell
him that, you are,
and I would show him how to
describe his own experiences
with regard to where his
adjutant had been taken.
And, of course,
neither he nor I would
have any idea where that was.
And then, at the
end of that trial,
we would take him to wherever
the people were hiding,
and he would then
get to decide, did
his drawings and his
experience correspond
to this distant place?
So it's not as though we
showed him some psychic data
by some mystery person.
He had his own experience,
and he would then
take that experience
back to Washington
so that he would know
that he wasn't deceived,
that he genuinely did describe
where his associate had
been hiding that day.
So as a result of that, I was
given a lot of opportunity
to explore the realms
of the quiet mind,
and I was able to then
carry that into my practice,
into my life.
And as I would show people how
to look upon a blank slate,
I was then able to learn to
deal with my own mental chatter.
This is not that I developed
some complicated meditative
procedure.
But rather, once you
have a quiet mind,
you have an opportunity
to introspect
and go into the aspects
of self inquiry,
ask yourself who you are, and as
the teachers of old would say,
who are you, and
who wants to know?
And you get into a
quiet period where
you have an opportunity to
reside in a very loving space.
This is the kind of
oceanic experiences
that the mystics have talked
about all throughout millennia.
It's as though you
have an opportunity
to reside in an
overwhelming, loving syrup.
I know it's hard to--
this is beyond boyfriends
and girlfriends.
It's the opportunity
to reside in love.
Jesus described it most clearly,
as the love is a peace that
passes understanding.
In the Christian tradition,
both Jesus and Paul
say that God is love.
>> You find it in many
traditions-- in fact, I think,
in every tradition.
But the intriguing
thing to me is
when you started this
research, the premise
behind parapsychology
is that we're
dealing with a phenomenon
that can be mapped and tested
using the empirical methods
of physical science.
And, surely,
military intelligence
had an interest because
they saw that it
would have practical purposes
to large organizations,
such as the government.
>> That's right.
Week after week, we would do on
the one hand application tasks
for the CIA--
describe what's happening
in a distant place,
and what we describe
would then be verified
by satellite photography.
And one of our
principal successes,
a retired policeman, Pat Price,
described a weapons facility
in the Soviet Union, given only
the geographical coordinates.
And he saw that a giant crane
was rolling back and forth
over a building, and
that crane was verified
by satellite photography.
He then described the
fabrication of a giant steel
sphere inside the building.
And he described
that in enough detail
so that we could
figure out that this
was the beginning of
a particle beam weapon
to shoot down the satellites
that were, in fact, taking
these pictures.
And this led to a
Congressional investigation
to see if there was
a security leak that
might have given
this information that
was unknown at the time
in the Western world.
And, of course, no
security leak was found.
And, in fact, this success
was significantly responsible
for the next decade
of our support.
>> So you started out with
the premise of using psychic
phenomenon within a
materialistic scientific
perspective for
practical purposes,
and you ended up becoming
a mystic and a lover of God
and a lover of humanity.
>> Well, a mystic is much
maligned in our society.
A mystic, in general,
throughout history,
from the ancient
Vedic times, thousands
of years before
Christ-- a mystic
is not a believer,
because we think today
that a mystic believes all
kinds of crazy, new age stuff.
That's not at all
what a mystic--
a mystic is a person who has had
an experience that connects him
with a transcendent experience
beyond his ordinary life.
When, for example,
in the Christian--
I grew up Jewish, so in
the Christian tradition,
I heard people say
that God is love.
And I thought that's something
that Christians say just
to annoy the nonbelievers
because the idea of God
as love is never unpacked.
It's never explained, what
that could possibly be.
But as you get in contact with
the mystic literature, what
you discover is that this
experience of love as a place
to reside, rather
than something to do,
is the essence of the mystic
experience from the earliest
times.
>> And from the perspective
of practical applications,
it's also the basis
of distant healing.
>> It seems to be.
In remote viewing, you
inflow information,
as we've discussed, and you can
experience things in the future
as well.
And as you know, we use psychic
abilities to forecast changes
in the silver commodity market.
In fact, my co-author
Jane Katra and I
did a series of silver
forecasts for our publisher.
Publisher said, if
you're telling people
how to be psychic,
it would be nice
if you would demonstrate that
the authors could actually
do something.
And in a 9-week--
or I guess a 12-week
period, we made 12 forecasts
for changes in the silver
commodity market, changes
in the price of silver.
And I think that you were
overseeing those experiments,
and your mild-mannered
authors had
11 out of 12 successes
forecasting silver futures.
So this is not an
airy-fairy ability.
It's an ability that we
could all be in touch with
and shows that our
dreams, for example,
reflect events in the
future that cause us to have
a dream at present time.
It indicates that we don't
understand our causality.
So in looking into the future
and looking into the distance,
you inflow information.
In the spiritual healing
you were just talking about,
you outflow your
mental intention
or your spiritual wishes for
the health of a distant person.
It's between the
inflow of information
and the outflow of intention
that these loving experiences
occur.
It's the quiet moment between
the inflow and the outflow
that we have an opportunity
to know God, to be in love.
>> And what you're saying,
then, if I hear you correctly,
is that the path of the mystic,
the path of one who experiences
oneness and bliss, is not
at all in contradiction with
the practical life that one
can lead in this world, with,
you know, a life in the world
of business or in science.
>> It's not in contradiction,
but what happens is that
the life of business
becomes less interesting,
because we're all looking
for happiness, of course.
Now, the good news is that if
you live in Silicon Valley,
as we do, these days, there
are multitudinous opportunities
to make money doing surprising,
inventive, different kinds
of computer-oriented
kinds of things.
And what you discover is that,
as you spend time in love
with a quiet mind, that those
things become less interesting.
For example, as you recall, when
we did the silver forecasting,
people said, this
looks wonderful.
You got 11 out of 12 hits
in the silver market.
Let's go into the
market with major money
and make our fortunes.
But my co-author
Jane and I said,
yes, we could probably do that.
That just doesn't
feel like what we
want to do with our quiet mind.
It's not bad.
It's not that God won't let
us use our ESP to make money,
because we have certainly done
that in previous experiments.
It's just not what the
quiet-minded person
feels he wants to do.
>> Russell Targ, what a pleasure
talking to you about these
things.
I really enjoy your grasp of
both the heart and the mind
coming together here to
understand our oneness,
our connection with everything.
Thanks so much
for being with me.
>> Thank you very much.
>> And thank you
for being with us.
[THEME MUSIC]